Hey, I'm Jad Aboumrad. I'm Robert Krulwich, this is Radiolab, and today, uh,
today we're falling in many different flavors and we're at number three.
So next we have the story of a different kind of fall. Alright. Or father. Yeah,
it comes from science writer, David Coleman.
One article in particular that he wrote caught our attention. All right,
I'm going to quote you to yourself. Okay. Nowadays, true enough,
we know quite a bit about cats. They'd been dissected in uncountable numbers,
their anatomy, their physiology, their behavior had been my noodly studied,
but there is much that we still don't know among all the other intractable
issues. One in particular arrest me.
What's the terminal velocity of a plummeting cat?
Can you give me a little history? Why did that question arrest you? I mean,
when I used to write for outside magazine,
I would browse through journals and I would come across obscure papers.
How I happened upon the Journal of the American Veterinary Medical Association,
familiarly known as j v. A. M. A,
I don't know. I don't remember,
but I'm sure that that was the starting point because it was in that journal.
The David ran across a research paper yeah. By two vets.
Wayne Whitney and Cheryl Mel Hoff who worked in um,
the mid town veterinary hospital right there on Sixth Avenue and 72nd.
And they noticed that, um,
that in Manhattan there were a lot of cats falling out of windows high windows,
falling off ledges falling off roofs. And what, what is it, what is a lot?
I mean, how many cats were coming into this?
We saw 132 cats fall in a five month summer period during 13.
That's in home and house. She actually works in the, um,
in the veterinary hospital here at the Animal Medical Center and she's been
there since that research paper was written back in 1986 when I came to New York
City. I said, what do you mean cats fall out of buildings?
It doesn't make sense. I said, why were the cat fall out?
But we'll get back to her. And I'm just a little bit,
130, two and five months. That's almost a reign of cats. Well, no,
don't say that because I think people should visit New York without, um,
without fan receiving umbrellas. You too. What are you doing?
I'm doing the math to see how many of that is in a week of, uh,
[inaudible] days. It's about, it's about four cats a day, isn't it yet? Geez,
let me see.
I think it takes a little less bit to falling out of buildings is what is with
this. It's a shame. We can only be about that. But according to David,
it's actually not as much of a shame as you would think.
22 of the cats that they saw had fallen from eight stories or higher.
And out of those 22, only one died.
21 Katz survived from eight stories or higher. Wow. That's a long way.
And there was one cat that fell 32 stories and the cat had a little bit of sort
of thoracic bruising and a chip tooth. And that was it to the quote. I mean,
how in the world do cats? I mean, we all know cats land on their feet. Yeah,
yeah, yeah. But how do they do that? Like these are not magical creatures. Wow.
If you go back about a thousand years, the, you know,
it was thought that they consorted with witches, with the devil, uh,
and their reputation got darker and darker.
The more people started to distrust and dislike cats,
the more they started to do horrible things to them.
They would put cats in a barrel and then they went run the barrel through with
sword. Oh, I'm also throwing them out of windows.
The defenestration of cats.
W what is a defenestration means showing up the window.
Really an extra is that was the word. Oh Jan.
Add that to your active vocabulary today. I glad to. So what,
what happened when they would defend a straight, these cats,
the cats would land on their feet and walk away
way that made people even crazier.
No, of course we love our cats now. We don't do that to our cats anymore.
But when we went to visit Ann back at the veterinary hospital,
we were asking her about the falling cats research paper,
which is called the feline high rose. The feeling of High Rise Syndrome.
Then the mystery of how cats from far from these amazing heightened survive.
Yeah. You got a lot deeper. Yeah. Well, cats,
it felt less than five stories. They did fine.
She's not too bad. CATSA fell over nine stories. They did find two,
she's not so bad, which is weird, but cats,
it fell between five and nine 25 floors and nine floors had really serious
injuries and had more injuries per cat. So cats did fill a little ways for,
okay. Cats fill a long ways where, okay, weirdly,
but this five to nine thing. Yeah. Yeah. So the,
so we had to get a physicist to help us explain this.
This is where we get back to what Kleiman calls the terminal velocity issue.
Or here's how an put it to us. Well,
say you're living on the 30th floor of a building and it's summertime.
You get done at work at five you go home and get there about six the apartment's
hot and stuffy and you open up those windows
and fluffy says, I'd like that pigeon out there.
And the next thing you know the misstep
[inaudible]
as the cat starts to fall, he's all disoriented and almost immediately,
probably within the first six feet, the cat's brain says, okay,
turn your front half over. Now bring your back legs around.
Like instant cat can apparently do that move lickety split,
but the cat is still speeding up, going faster and faster. Three floors,
five floors, seven floors.
Then after falling about nine floors and accelerating the speeds up to about 60
miles an hour, something happens to
hit an equilibrium between the pull of gravity and wind resistance.
What it means is gravity is pulling down on you.
In the peak pole is between five and nine floors for a cat,
but after nine floors, the wind resistance,
which all the while has been pushing back up on you, starts to slow you down.
You don't speed up. So that's your
cruising speed. It's your cruising speed. After the cat's hit,
terminal velocity and the sensation of acceleration was gone. They relaxed.
Did they sort of stretch out like a flying squirrel
and then they hit the ground belly flop.
And you're saying that because they hit this screws in speed and then relaxing
to the flying squirrel? The impact is less. Yes. Yeah.
And in our record here, it wasn't in this paper,
but our record is 42 floors and the cat walked away. Wow. 42.
Is that a lucky cat or that just plain physics?
Should cats everywhere go to the 42nd floor before jumping out of the window.
[inaudible] dot of a window. That's right. Stay in doors. No fluffy back.
[inaudible]
oh, okay. So the next, uh, falling, what are we gonna call these falling,
falling, falling nodes. Now is there an f word you could use? Features. Yes. Oh,
great. Great. Our next falling feature. Oh boy. Okay. No,
I mean it's okay if you will.
You invited Columbia University physics Professor Brian Green into our studios.
I get to play with any buttons. Uh, yeah,
we wanted to ask him what we know really one of the most basic questions you
could ask a physicist, why do we fall?
You know,
we all know that Newton wrote down a law of gravity to calculate how gravity axa
from one object to another. Yeah. Like if you dropped your pen, that's right.
But there's a difference between being able to predict what will happen and be
able to explain why it happens. And Newton could not explain why it happens.
He could only tell you what would happen.
But I mean how it works is it just pulls to the pen down.
What does that mean though? Has it pull it.
I don't see anything between the table and your pen.
So what is the agent responsible for the pole? Um
hmm. This is something, even Albert Einstein himself couldn't quite figure out.
He was struggling to understand how the force of gravity works and it was a big,
big puzzle.
And the legend goes at Albert Einstein was walking around one day and he found
himself imagining a person riding in an elevator and all of a sudden the cable
gets cut and the elevator starts a plunge right down towards the earth
diversion.
I know right that he was actually sitting at his desk looking out the window and
was imagining window washers falling sorta from their scaffolding,
but it's the same, same exact idea. But anyway,
we were going to stick with the elevator version for now. Einstein,
imagine this person standing actually on a bathroom scale in the elevator,
in the elevator. This is before the cable gets cut.
If the person is in the elevator standing on a scale,
they see that they weigh 160 pounds and then snip
when the elevator cable is cut,
they look down at the scale and the scale will drop to zero because the scale
will be falling away from their feet at exactly the same, right?
That their feet are falling so their feet won't push on the scale any longer
cause this, we'll be moving downward with that. In my mind,
I've imagined like the Hollywood movie where it's falling so fast,
everybody kind of drifts up, right? So I Stein said to himself,
hang on a second,
here's an environment where in essence I can turn gravity off.
Another way of saying it that flips it around and may make it more clear.
Just as you can turn gravity off by snapping the cable,
you can actually simulate gravity by pulling on the cable that pulls that
elevator up really, really quickly.
Cause now the scale is running into your feet. If you're standing on that scale,
they won't read 160 it might read 250 huh?
It seems like gravity and being pulled up really fast.
They're the same thing. They are Jan, look what that look at you.
You just have the insight on your own. That's right. He walked,
he walked us 17 steps and I just made the last baby step. You did it.
You did it man. So whenever you're faced with a gravitational problem,
this allowed you to ignore gravity and translate it into a problem about motion.
Does that, does that solve the the what is gravity question? It just sorta, no,
he then had to make one more leap and it's not obvious how we took the final
step, but the final step was to realize that the,
what is gravity is the curvature of space and time.
That's a lead. I don't know what that means. This is a very difficult concept.
Do you understand it?
I understand what Einstein w tells you when he explained it. He said,
if you imagine the universe as a vast rubber mat,
a rubber mat held really, really taught, let's just take, oh,
I don't know. Let's take the earth and just plop it on to the mat.
So what just happened? Well, it sunk into the rubber. It's stretched the rubber,
didn't it? Yeah. The rubber is kind of curved around underneath it.
In Einstein's mind he thought maybe this is how to explain gravity.
This is what gravity is. That curved shape of space,
he said,
and the pen falls because it's following a contour in that curved space time
environment. So like if we're living on the curve,
then we're constantly falling down that down that curve. Yeah. Yeah.
We have no choice.
And the reason why right now I feel the chair pushing up on me is again,
my body also wants to slide down, but the chair's getting in the way.
So we're all sort of on some kind of slope sliding down unless we're,
that's right. That's right. I like that. Yeah.
I'm now an adherent to that theory. Again, not knowing anything else.
Now for number five, should we call it falling fortunes or, well,
falling fortunes is a good one for this, I think. Yeah,
because someone is seeking fame and fortune and then false.
The idea of the uh, gravity hero. Uh,
to me one of the things that it goes along with that,
was that a term that was used? Gravity heroes? No, that's my term.
I like it though. It's a really catchy term. Well, thanks. Yeah,
this is Garrett Soden. He's an author,
author of a defying gravity original title falling.
How our greatest fear became our greatest thrill of history and speaking of
history and fears and thrills.
And I would add to that list tragedy he tells the following story.
It really started with a Niagara Falls because up to that point people had done
all kinds of things at Niagara Falls,
tobacco Edis the 1850s and at Niagara Falls you've got these two guys doing
tight rope tricks over the falls. Yeah. Um, a fellow named Charles Blondin,
famous French wire walker and a Canadian guy who called himself great Freeney
and they would Duke it out, right. London came out,
strung a rope across Niagara Falls, put a chair down,
bounced on two legs and stood Adi. Well one time he carried a guy over.
He had to keep upping the ante. So Tau for his greatest trick,
he carried a small cast iron stove on his back with some firewood.
He got out there and he put the stove down, lit a fire,
had a couple of eggs in a fry pan and made an omelet right over this churning.
Like rapid. Yes. Wow. So the great Freeney came out with a washing machine.
That was his answer. Wanted wash some clothes out there. Yeah.
The thing to know about these guys is it does. This is basically just a show,
cause for example, the wire that they walked on,
it was pretty wide about the diameter of a Coffee Cup and really they were just
avoiding the big trick, the most anticipated trick.
The one that everybody was waiting for was somebody going over the falls in the
barrel.
The guy who did that would be the real gravity. Woo.
You were walking [inaudible] Niagara Falls with be great forces of nature.
Every second 600,000 gallons fall over the edge pound rocks below was such a
fury that you can hear it five miles away,
which is why in 1850 when PT Barnum saw the fall,
he said that if someone could figure out a way to go over that, that would,
that would be a huge strength that would give them fame and fortune.
That's a Joan Marie been poet, she's a poet.
She's written in a whole book for us about the first person to conquer the falls
in a barrel and it's called Queen of the missed queen in the mist. Huh?
Yup. So it wasn't a guy then? No,
I just said it was a guy to set you up so that you would ask me that question
because in fact it was a woman. Wow. Props to her. Thank you for acting.
To phrase, what's her name? Chad. Danny Taylor.
When we first meet any Taylor,
this was 1901 she was down on her luck because she had been a a,
she'd done a lot of different things. She'd run a dancing school.
She had been a principal. She had traveled all over the world.
Her only child had died, her husband right after that,
and she was broke,
but then it hit her.
She was sitting at home sitting your newer apartment in Bay city, Michigan,
and for some odd reasons,
she read an article about the goings on at Niagara Falls and she decided she
would go over Niagara Falls.
Well, why?
I mean do we know she's looking to save herself from the poor house?
She was after money and when she read about these guys at Niagara Falls,
she thought this is it.
Right? So she called a Cooper to build the barrel. At first.
He refused to build it when he heard what her plan was. But finally
you did, and not long after Annie was on a train with her barrel
headed to the falls. By the way, a what day are we talking about?
So we have a date,
October 24th in 1901 okay.
Word had spread. This was going to be a spectacle. Everyone was there.
Mobs of people, thousands up and down the river.
Tens of thousands and Annie shows up waving to the crowd wearing a very fancy
Victorian dress and a hat with ostrich feathers. Wow. She's quite the lady.
But then they go on an island
where's she changes into some gym clothes and now she gets in the barrel.
They tow her out to the middle of the river. Then they knock
and cut the rope
[inaudible]
and off she goes to the brain.
the roar of the river.
[inaudible]
enormous
and it's wet at my feed and I'm feeling while I'm in there that this is
miserable. The interesting thing is that Joan's poem, she actually becomes,
and I careened and spun,
she's in the barrel getting hurled down the river tossed and turned my brain
toilet, and as she gets closer to the edge, it's about a half mile journey.
She begins to go
hallucinate Michael Glimpse through the turbulence.
There was my young husband, his arms, our baby
rambling and the wind, and then
this moment of weightlessness,
she's going [inaudible]
down [inaudible] pools below the great mass of foam and boiling water,
and then she shoots out again
through the buoyancy of the barrel, about 15 feet in the air.
Wow. The barrel crashes back back down on the water,
and then it floats
over to some rocks and a rescue team paddle out to the barrel right away.
They get the barrel and they have to Assad open the crowd,
no doubt his thinking. That woman is dead.
There is nothing but a dead woman in that barrel. But
when they pull her out route, she's alive.
Hi Alive.
She took on this thing that the world was waiting for
and she did it.
She was the first to ever try and Joan when she was pulled out of that barrel
and presumably she's going to take the next step into fame and fortune.
What happened? More or less, nothing.
She stepped out of the barrel and she didn't look right.
She didn't look like a hero. [inaudible] at me.
Well, I've kept something from you coalition. What to think,
I haven't told you is that not only was she wet and soggy and according to the
newspaper accounts hysterical. And who wouldn't be?
She was 63. She was your grandmother.
She was an older lady. Like Joan said, you know, for the hero consuming public.
She just didn't look right
after that exhibition. Um,
her manager ran off with the barrel and he took the barrel and he started,
uh, going on the circuit with a lovely young woman.
Did he claimed was Annie Taylor? No. Much better showpiece. Oh, Yay.
Well, what happened to Andy though?
She would drag herself to Niagara each spring and summer.
We just sit on a street with a barrel. It wasn't the original barrel,
but it was a barrel and do what?
She probably had photographs of herself that she signed.
And did she ever make any money off this? No. No.
She died in a poor house,
which is where she didn't want to wind up, but that is where she wound up.
And just 10 years later,
somebody repeats Annie's feet a man and he tours the world.
Bastard. Yeah. Bastard. But
because the heavens are merciful during this guy's victory lap,
as he's traveling around the world, he's, he slipped.
He slipped on an orange rind in Australia or New Zealand.
Got a compound fracture of his leg. Huh?
She says that leg got gangrene and he died. Yeah,
there is. There is cosmic justice.